[WIP]feat: proposal doc for status-subresource for config objects (#7536)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/proposals/202501-configuration-object-status-subresource.md

## Status Subresource For Config-Based Resources

* **Owners:**
  * [yp969803](https://github.com/yp969803)
* **Status:**

>   * `In-Progress`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Accepted`
```

* **Related Tickets:**
  * [#3385](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3335)
* **Other docs:**

>   * NA

Reviewer: We can link to the status subresource proposal for workload resources as well as the Kube API conventions doc.

> This proposal describes how we will extend the Prometheus operator configuration Custom
> Resource Definitions (CRDs) with a Status subresource field.

> ## Why

Reviewer: (suggestion) a table showing the relationship between config and workload resources might be useful (e.g. PrometheusRule can apply to Prometheus and ThanosRuler resources).

> This will enhance observability by allowing users to verify whether their configurations have been successfully applied to Workload.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
This will allow users to verify whether their configurations have been successfully applied to the corresponding workload resources.
```

## Pitfalls of the current solution

> Prometheus operator allows users to define their observability workloads through "workload" resources like `Prometheus`, `PrometheusAgent`, `AlertManager`. The configuration of these workloads can be done dynamically by orchestrating "configuration" resources like `ServiceMonitor`, `PodMonitor`, `ScrapeConfig`, etc which in turn are used to generate the configuration for the workloads that the Prometheus-Operator manages.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
Prometheus operator allows users to define their observability workloads through "workload" resources like `Prometheus`, `PrometheusAgent`, `AlertManager`. The configuration of these workloads can be done dynamically by orchestrating "configuration" resources like `ServiceMonitor`, `PodMonitor`, `ScrapeConfig`, etc.
```

Currently, the status subresource is only implemented for workload resources. The absence of the status subresource for configuration resources makes it difficult to determine the source of the generated configuration of the workload resources. Additionally, there is no straightforward way to observe the reconciliation status of configuration resources. While Kubernetes events are available when a configuration is rejected by a workload, they are not sufficient for ongoing visibility or troubleshooting.

> ## Goals

Reviewer: The goal definitions could be a bit more user-centric (e.g. "feature gate" by itself isn't a goal). We should also call out the need to report about a config resource being "invalid":
* Prometheus/Alertmanager version not supporting a feature.
* Invalid configmap/secret key reference.
* Other?

* Define the structure of the status subresource for the custom resource definitions
  * `ServiceMonitor`
  * `PodMonitor`
  * `ScrapeConfig`
  * `Probes`
  * `PrometheusRule`
  * `AlertmanagerConfig`

> * Information about number of Up/Down targets in status subresource for PodMonitor, ServiceMonitor, Probes and ScrapeConfig.

Reviewer: We'll also to detail what we want to report about AlertmanagerConfig and PrometheusRule. There's also the information about which config is deployed to which workload.
```suggestion
* Provide information about the targets being scraped and their status for scrape resources (`PodMonitor`, `ServiceMonitor`, `Probes` and `ScrapeConfig`).
```

> * Define how the operator would reconcile the status subresource.

Reviewer: Not really a user-visible goal.

* Feature gate to help the user to enable/disable the feature.

> ### Audience

Reviewer: you're just following the existing template but IMHO "non-goals" should follow "goals". Not sure where to put "Audience" yet but I'll submit a PR.

* Users of Prometheus-Operator
* Maintainers and Contributors of Prometheus-Operator

## Non-Goals

* The status subresource is intended to offer only a summary (e.g., counts of up/down targets) of the scrape status.
* No information about the fired alerts in the status subresource of PrometheusRule (too heavy for the operator to query the prometheus pod for the alerts information. Prometheus may have a significant number of alerts, and fetching them repeatedly increases significant load in the operator).
* The status subresource is not intended to provide realtime information of the targets.

## How

### CRDs

#### `ServiceMonitor`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: example-servicemonitor
  namespace: monitoring
  labels:
    team: backend
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-service
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
      - default
  endpoints:
    - port: http
      path: /metrics
      interval: 30s
      scheme: http
  status:
    bindings:
      - resource: prometheus
        name: prometheus-main

>         namespace: monitoring

Reviewer: (nit) we could add `group` for be consistent with `ObjectReference`.

        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ReconcileSucceeded
            message: "Successfully reconciled with Prometheus"
        pods:
          - name: prometheus-main-0
            namespace: monitoring

>             endpoint: http://10.42.0.10:9090

Reviewer: Is it the Prometheus endpoint? If yes what's the rationale for putting it here?

        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ReconcileSucceeded
            message: "Successfully reconciled with Prometheus"
```

#### `AlertManagerConfig`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: minimal-alertmanager-config
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  route:
    receiver: "webhook-receiver"
  receivers:
    - name: "webhook-receiver"
      webhookConfigs:
        - url: "http://my-webhook-service.monitoring.svc:8080/"
          sendResolved: true
  status:
    bindings:
      - resource: alertmanager
        name: alertmanager-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ReconcileSucceeded
            message: "Successfully reconciled with Prometheus"
```

Finalizers are used during the deletion of the config-resource and workload-resource to clear the refrences in the status-subresource.

## Alternatives

> #### Dedicated CRD Approach for Configuration-Workload Mapping

Reviewer: we could mention https://secrets-store-csi-driver.sigs.k8s.io/concepts.html?highlight=api#secretproviderclasspodstatus as an example

## Why

This will enhance observability by allowing users to verify whether their configurations have been successfully applied to Workload.

## Pitfalls of the current solution

Currently, the status subresource is only implemented for workload resources. This makes it difficult to determine which workloads are using which configurations—especially since a single workload can reference multiple configurations. Additionally, there is no straightforward way to observe the reconciliation status of configuration resources. While Kubernetes events are available when a configuration is rejected by a workload, they are not sufficient for ongoing visibility or troubleshooting.

## Goals

* Define the structure of the status subresource for the custom resource definitions
  * `ServiceMonitor`
  * `PodMonitor`
  * `ScrapeConfig`
  * `Probes`
  * `PrometheusRule`
  * `AlertmanagerConfig`
* Information about number of Up/Down targets in status subresource for PodMonitor, ServiceMonitor, Probes and ScrapeConfig.
* Define how the operator would reconcile the status subresource.
* Feature gate to help the user to enable/disable the feature.

> ### Audience

Reviewer 2: This section should cover who are the intended audience of this Proposal. In this case, it would be 
Users of Prometheus-Operator
Maintainers and Contributors of Prometheus-Operator
Consumers of Prometheus-Operator CRDs (there are other OSS that consume our CRDs like ServiceMon and PodMon)

Can use the status subresource to debug configuration issues like:

* Misconfigured selectors
* Network issues
* Misconfigured secrets

> ## Non-Goals

Reviewer 2: This section should contain higher level non-objectives of this Proposal. For example "This proposal does not intend to be a complete map of the implementation details" etc.

Reviewer 3: May be non-goals could also mention about not planning to cover what poctl does already

> * The status subresource offers only a summary (e.g., counts of up/down targets), not detailed per-target scrape status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The status subresource is intended to offer only a summary (e.g., counts of up/down targets) of the scrape status. 
```

> * No information about the fired alerts in the status subresource of PrometheusRule (too heavy for the operator to query the prometheus pod for the alerts information. Prometheus may have a significant number of alerts, and fetching them repeatedly increases significant load in the operator).

Reviewer 2: (nit) This seems like too low level of a detail to be included in this section.

> * The information about the targets is not realtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The status subresource is not intended to provide realtime information of the targets.
```

> ## How

Reviewer 2: Having a `### Workflow` section might be pretty useful here. Since we do need to outline how the Operator gets the information to populate the status subresource with.

Reviewer 2: It would also be great if you can include a bit of your rationale for going with one design choice over an another, (in case there are such cases) in brief just so that the reader can get more context out of it. Open for discussion though.
CC: @simonpasquier @slashpai

Reviewer: I would also suggest to highlight the challenges which drives the API design. For instance, 
* a single config resource can be selected by different workload resources.
* the config resource might not live in the same namespace as the workload.

> #### CRDs

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
### CRDs
```

> An example CRD of serviceMonitor

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
#### `ServiceMonitor`
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: I think it should be fine to just show the `status` field here since these CRDs can be a bit on the bigger side. But it's up to you, no strong opinions.

Reviewer: No strong opinion either but I'm fine with a redux version.

Author: i am fine with full CRD

apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: example-servicemonitor
  namespace: monitoring
  labels:
    team: backend
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-service
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
      - default
  endpoints:
    - port: http
      path: /metrics
      interval: 30s
      scheme: http
  status:
    bindings:
      - resource: prometheus
        name: prometheus-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ReconcileSucceeded
            message: "Successfully reconciled with Prometheus"
        pods:
          - name: prometheus-main-0
            namespace: monitoring
            endpoint: http://10.42.0.10:9090
            totalScrapedTargets: 3
            totalUpTargets: 2
            totalDownTargets: 1
            lastCheckedTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
```

CRDs of podMonitor, scrapeCOnfig and Probes looks similar to above.

> The operator sends the GET request at regular interval to the config-reloader sidecar with the serviceMonitor selector labels as the request body, the sidecar container after receiving the request sends the /api/v1/targets request to prometheus-container, from the response it gets from the prometheus, it modifies the response based on the labels and send the response to the operator. The sidecar will remove information from the response which can be used by attackers.

Reviewer 2: It would be easier to read if this information has it's own subsection. 
I have a couple of questions:
1. Why can't we directly request the Prometheus-Container from the Operator?
2. How does the sidecar help with malicious users in this case?

Author: We have to process the response that we get from the prometheus container, the side-car container helps with this, so that the critical informations do not leave the prometheus Pod

Author: The response contains critical information such as targets ip address, status and labels, which can be used by attacker

> CRD of PrometheusRule

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `PrometheusRule`
```

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: example-prometheus-rules
  namespace: monitoring
  labels:
    prometheus: k8s
    role: alert-rules
spec:
  groups:
    - name: example.rules
      interval: 30s
      rules:
        - alert: HighPodCPUUsage
          expr: sum(rate(container_cpu_usage_seconds_total{container!="", pod!=""}[5m])) by (pod) > 0.5
          for: 5m
          labels:
            severity: warning
          annotations:
            summary: "High CPU usage on pod {{ $labels.pod }}"
            description: "Pod {{ $labels.pod }} is using more than 0.5 cores for 5 minutes."
  status:
    bindings:
      - resource: prometheus
        name: prometheus-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ReconcileSucceeded
            message: "Successfully reconciled with Prometheus"
```

> CRD of AlertManagerConfig

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `AlertManagerConfig`
```

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: minimal-alertmanager-config
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  route:
    receiver: "webhook-receiver"
  receivers:
    - name: "webhook-receiver"
      webhookConfigs:
        - url: "http://my-webhook-service.monitoring.svc:8080/"
          sendResolved: true
  status:
    bindings:
      - resource: alertmanager
        name: alertmanager-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ReconcileSucceeded
            message: "Successfully reconciled with Prometheus"
```

> Finalizers are used during the deletion of the config-resource and workload-resource to clear the refrences in the status-subresource.

Reviewer 2: (nit) That is correct. But I don't see why it needs to be mentioned here

Reviewer: IMHO details about why we need finalizers and how it will work could be its own section.

## Status Subresource For Config-Based Resources

* **Owners:**
  * [yp969803](https://github.com/yp969803)
* **Status:**
  * `Accepted`
* **Related Tickets:**
  * [#3385](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3335)
* **Other docs:**
  * https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status
  * https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md
  * [workload status subresource proposal](202409-status-subresource.md)

> > This proposal describes how we will extend the Prometheus operator configuration Custom

Reviewer 3: This proposal outlines the implementation of a Status subresource field extension to the Prometheus operator config based resource Custom Resource Definitions(CRDs).

## Goals

* Define the structure of the status subresource for the custom resource definitions
  * `ServiceMonitor`
  * `PodMonitor`
  * `ScrapeConfig`
  * `Probes`
  * `PrometheusRule`
  * `AlertmanagerConfig`
* Provide information about the targets being scraped and their status for scrape resources (`PodMonitor`, `ServiceMonitor`, `Probes` and `ScrapeConfig`).
* Reporting in status section when a configuration resource is considered invalid during reconciliation. Examples include:
  * The Prometheus or Alertmanager version does not support a specific feature.
  * Invalid configmap/secret key reference.
  * Invalid PrometheusRule.

## Non-Goals

* The status subresource is intended to offer only a summary (e.g., counts of up/down targets) of the scrape status.
* No information about the fired alerts in the status subresource of PrometheusRule (too heavy for the operator to query the prometheus pod for the alerts information. Prometheus may have a significant number of alerts, and fetching them repeatedly increases significant load in the operator).
* The status subresource is not intended to provide realtime information of the targets.

> * Configuration resources like ServiceMonitor or PodMonitor do not expose status information that explains why they are not being selected by Prometheus or why their targets are not being scraped

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Configuration resources won't expose status information that explains why they are not being selected by Prometheus or why their targets are not being scraped.
```

### Audience

* Users of Prometheus-Operator
* Maintainers and Contributors of Prometheus-Operator

## How

Challenges that influenced the API design :

> * A single config resource can be selected by different workload resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* A single config resource can be selected by multiple workload resources.
```

> * The config resource might not live in the same namespace as the workload.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The config resource might not be in the same namespace as the workload resource.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: secrets-store.csi.x-k8s.io/v1
kind: SecretProviderClassPodStatus
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2021-01-21T19:20:11Z"
  generation: 1
  labels:
    internal.secrets-store.csi.k8s.io/node-name: kind-control-plane
    manager: secrets-store-csi
    operation: Update
    time: "2021-01-21T19:20:11Z"
  name: nginx-secrets-store-inline-crd-dev-azure-spc
  namespace: dev
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Pod
    name: nginx-secrets-store-inline-crd
    uid: 10f3e31c-d20b-4e46-921a-39e4cace6db2
  resourceVersion: "1638459"
  selfLink: /apis/secrets-store.csi.x-k8s.io/v1/namespaces/dev/secretproviderclasspodstatuses/nginx-secrets-store-inline-crd
  uid: 1d078ad7-c363-4147-a7e1-234d4b9e0d53
status:
  mounted: true
  objects:
  - id: secret/secret1
    version: c55925c29c6743dcb9bb4bf091be03b0
  - id: secret/secret2
    version: 7521273d0e6e427dbda34e033558027a
  podName: nginx-secrets-store-inline-crd
  secretProviderClassName: azure-spc
  targetPath: /var/lib/kubelet/pods/10f3e31c-d20b-4e46-921a-39e4cace6db2/volumes/kubernetes.io~csi/secrets-store-inline/mount
```

It comes with the following drawbacks:

> - Introducing a new CRD means extra operational complexity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Introducing a new CRD could lead to additional operational complexity.
```

> - It requires installation, maintenance, and versioning, which could increase the administrative burden.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It requires installation, maintenance and versioning, which could increase the administrative burden.
```

## Status Subresource For Config-Based Resources

* **Owners:**
  * [yp969803](https://github.com/yp969803)
* **Status:**
  * `Accepted`
* **Related Tickets:**
  * [#3385](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3335)
* **Other docs:**
  * https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status
  * https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md
  * [workload status subresource proposal](202409-status-subresource.md)

> This proposal outlines the implementation of a Status subresource field extension to the Prometheus operator config based resource Custom Resource Definitions(CRDs).

## Why

This will allow users to verify whether their configurations have been successfully applied to the corresponding workload resources.

> Mapping between configuration resources and their associated workloads

Author: ok

Prometheus operator allows users to define their observability workloads through "workload" resources like `Prometheus`, `PrometheusAgent`, `AlertManager`. The configuration of these workloads can be done dynamically by orchestrating "configuration" resources like `ServiceMonitor`, `PodMonitor`, `ScrapeConfig`, etc.

Currently, the status subresource is only implemented for workload resources. The absence of the status subresource for configuration resources makes it difficult to determine the source of the generated configuration of the workload resources. Additionally, there is no straightforward way to observe the reconciliation status of configuration resources. While Kubernetes events are available when a configuration is rejected by a workload, they are not sufficient for ongoing visibility or troubleshooting.

## Goals

* Define the structure of the status subresource for the custom resource definitions
  * `ServiceMonitor`
  * `PodMonitor`
  * `ScrapeConfig`
  * `Probes`
  * `PrometheusRule`
  * `AlertmanagerConfig`
* Provide information about the targets being scraped and their status for scrape resources (`PodMonitor`, `ServiceMonitor`, `Probes` and `ScrapeConfig`).

> * Reporting in status section when a configuration resource is considered invalid during reconciliation. Examples include:

Author: ok

  * The Prometheus or Alertmanager version does not support a specific feature.
  * Invalid configmap/secret key reference.
  * Invalid PrometheusRule.

## Non-Goals

* The status subresource is intended to offer only a summary (e.g., counts of up/down targets) of the scrape status.
* No information about the fired alerts in the status subresource of PrometheusRule (too heavy for the operator to query the prometheus pod for the alerts information. Prometheus may have a significant number of alerts, and fetching them repeatedly increases significant load in the operator).
* The status subresource is not intended to provide realtime information of the targets.
* Configuration resources won't expose status information that explains why they are not being selected by Prometheus or why their targets are not being scraped.

> * [poctl](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/poctl) also provides some insights into configuration resources, not planning to reimplement the stuffs again in status subresource.

Author: ok

      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: prometheuses
        name: prometheus-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "False"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: InvalidConfiguration
            message: "rule 0, alert: 'HighPodCPUUsage', parse error: expected type vector in aggregation expression, got scalar"
```

#### `AlertManagerConfig`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: minimal-alertmanager-config
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  route:
    receiver: "webhook-receiver"
  receivers:
    - name: "webhook-receiver"
      webhookConfigs:
        - url: "http://my-webhook-service.monitoring.svc:8080/"
          sendResolved: true
  status:
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: alertmanagers
        name: alertmanager-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
```

### Working

> #### How to get targets information in scrape resources ?

Reviewer: job_name can be used to deduce the link (e.g. `serviceMonitor/namespace/name/i`). In all cases, we'll use it to feedback the target stats to the status subresource.
To be clear I was only mentioning this as a thought exercise, I don't think that it's worth pursuing but it might be good to capture the idea in the doc.

> The operator sends the GET request at regular interval to the config-reloader sidecar with the serviceMonitor selector labels as the request body, the sidecar container after receiving the request sends the /api/v1/targets request to prometheus-container, from the response it gets from the prometheus, it modifies the response based on the labels and send the response to the operator. The sidecar will remove critical informations from the response which can be used by attackers.

Author: i am agree with gRPC instead of using REST

> The operator sends the GET request at regular interval to the config-reloader sidecar with the serviceMonitor selector labels as the request body, the sidecar container after receiving the request sends the /api/v1/targets request to prometheus-container, from the response it gets from the prometheus, it modifies the response based on the labels and send the response to the operator. The sidecar will remove critical informations from the response which can be used by attackers.

Author: The user can attach the certificates as configmap to both prometheus pod and operator pod

> The operator sends the GET request at regular interval to the config-reloader sidecar with the serviceMonitor selector labels as the request body, the sidecar container after receiving the request sends the /api/v1/targets request to prometheus-container, from the response it gets from the prometheus, it modifies the response based on the labels and send the response to the operator. The sidecar will remove critical informations from the response which can be used by attackers.

Author: "Reporting status from the workload can be disabled at the operator level (CLI argument probably).", if the statusForConfigResource flag is false, we do not inject  env variable to config reloader sidecar, if the env is not present there is no status logic working in sidecar.

> The operator sends the GET request at regular interval to the config-reloader sidecar with the serviceMonitor selector labels as the request body, the sidecar container after receiving the request sends the /api/v1/targets request to prometheus-container, from the response it gets from the prometheus, it modifies the response based on the labels and send the response to the operator. The sidecar will remove critical informations from the response which can be used by attackers.

Reviewer: Let's flesh out the details on authn/authz in the doc. Again my preference would be mTLS. The question is indeed how the operator admin provisions the credentials (in all cases it would be secrets over configmaps).

> The operator sends the GET request at regular interval to the config-reloader sidecar with the serviceMonitor selector labels as the request body, the sidecar container after receiving the request sends the /api/v1/targets request to prometheus-container, from the response it gets from the prometheus, it modifies the response based on the labels and send the response to the operator. The sidecar will remove critical informations from the response which can be used by attackers.

Author: ok

## Goals

* Define the structure of the status subresource for the custom resource definitions
  * `ServiceMonitor`
  * `PodMonitor`
  * `ScrapeConfig`
  * `Probes`
  * `PrometheusRule`
  * `AlertmanagerConfig`
* Provide information about the targets being scraped and their status for scrape resources (`PodMonitor`, `ServiceMonitor`, `Probes` and `ScrapeConfig`).
* Report when a configuration resource is considered invalid during reconciliation. For example:
  * Feature not being supported by the version of the workload.
  * Invalid configmap/secret key reference.
  * Invalid PromQL expression in PrometheusRule resources.

## Non-Goals

* The solution does not aim to expose the full live configuration or runtime status of Prometheus. For example:
  * It will not include per-target scrape status, only summary information (e.g., number of targets up/down).

>   * It will not surface fired alerts from PrometheusRule resources, as querying Prometheus for this data can be expensive and places undue load on both Prometheus and the operator.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
  * It will not surface fired alerts from PrometheusRule resources, as querying Prometheus for this data can be expensive and places undue load on Prometheus, the operator and the Kubernetes platform in general.
```
I think that the last part could in the preamble

````
The solution does not aim to expose the full live configuration or runtime status of Prometheus. Doing so would be expensive for the workload, the operator and the Kubernetes system in general.
```

> * The status subresource is not intended to provide realtime information of the targets.

Reviewer: same as above?

* Configuration resources won't expose status information that explains why they are not being selected by Prometheus or why their targets are not being scraped.

> * The solution doesn't attempt to replace [poctl](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/poctl) which provides some insights into configuration resources.

Reviewer: maybe a sub-bullet of the previous point? E.g. the non-goal can be addressed by poctl.

Author: ok

### Audience

* Users of Prometheus-Operator
* Maintainers and Contributors of Prometheus-Operator

## How

> Challenges that influenced the API design :

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
There are different challenges that influence the API design:
```

Author: ok

* A single config resource can be selected by multiple workload resources.

> * The config resource might not be in the same namespace as the workload resource.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
* The configuration resource may not be in the same namespace as the workload resource.
```

* Which workload selects which configuration resources can vary over time depending on the workload resource's label selectors and on the configuration resource's labels.

### CRDs

#### `ServiceMonitor`/`PodMonitor`/`Probes`/`ScrapeConfig`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: example-servicemonitor

>   namespace: monitoring

Author: done

  labels:
    team: backend
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-service
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
      - default
  endpoints:
    - port: http
      path: /metrics
      interval: 30s
      scheme: http
      basicAuth:
        username:
          name: my-secret
          key: basic-auth-username
        password:
          name: my-secret
          key: basic-auth-password
  status:
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: prometheuses
        name: prometheus-main
        namespace: monitoring
        targets: 
          up: 2
          down: 1
          lastCheckedTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
        conditions:

>           - type: Reconciled

Reviewer: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/#routestatus

The Gateway API Route status uses an "Accepted" condition which is quite neutral. It also exposes a "ResolvedRefs" condition to indicate that all references are resolved but I'm not sure that we need more than 1 condition type in our case.

            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 3
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
```

> some other example conditions which can take place,

Reviewer: suggestion: the example could show the same ServiceMonitor being bound to 2 Prometheus/PrometheusAgent resources with different conditions
* 1 Prometheus with Reconciled=True
* 1 PrometheusAgent with Reconciled=False

Author: ok

```yaml
conditions:
  - type: Reconciled
    status: "False"
    observedGeneration: 2
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-02-08T23:52:22Z"
    reason: InvalidConfiguration
    message: "'KeepEqual' relabel action is only supported with Prometheus >= 2.41.0"
```

```yaml
conditions:
  - type: Reconciled
    status: "False"
    observedGeneration: 1
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-02-08T23:52:22Z"
    reason: InvalidConfiguration
    message: "Referenced Secret 'my-secret' in namespace 'monitoring' is missing or does not contain the required key 'basic-auth-password'."
```

#### `PrometheusRule`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: example-prometheus-rules
  namespace: monitoring
  labels:
    prometheus: k8s
    role: alert-rules
spec:
  groups:
    - name: example.rules
      interval: 30s
      rules:
        - alert: HighPodCPUUsage

>           expr: sum(rate(container_cpu_usage_seconds_total{container!="", pod!=""}[5m)) by (pod) > 0.5

Reviewer: (nit) it took me time to spot the typo :sweat_smile: 
```suggestion
          expr: sum(rate())
```

Author: ok

kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: minimal-alertmanager-config
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  route:
    receiver: "webhook-receiver"
  receivers:
    - name: "webhook-receiver"
      webhookConfigs:
        - url: "http://my-webhook-service.monitoring.svc:8080/"
          sendResolved: true
  status:
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: alertmanagers
        name: alertmanager-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
```

### Working

#### How to get targets information in scrape resources ?

The operator sends the GET request at regular interval to the config-reloader sidecar with the serviceMonitor selector labels as the request body, the sidecar container after receiving the request sends the /api/v1/targets request to prometheus-container, from the response it gets from the prometheus, it modifies the response based on the labels and send the response to the operator. The sidecar will remove critical informations from the response which can be used by attackers.

> #### How to clear refrences in status section if the workload is deleted ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### How to remove a binding when the workload is deleted ?
```

A dedicated goroutine runs continuously to monitor configuration resources for any invalid bindings.

## Alternatives

#### Dedicated CRD Approach for Configuration-Workload Mapping

A potential solution to mapping a configuration resource to a workload resource is the introduction of a Custom Resource Definition (CRD). This new CRD would act as an intermediary, maintaining a clear association between configurations and workloads.

The [Secrets Store CSI Driver](https://secrets-store-csi-driver.sigs.k8s.io/introduction) handles the Secrets Provider pod status in a similar way.

It comes with the following drawbacks:
* Introducing a new CRD could lead to additional operational complexity.
* It requires installation, maintenance and versioning, which could increase the administrative burden.

#### Storing Information in the Workload Resource

Another approach is to store configuration mappings directly within the workload resource.

It comes with the following drawbacks:
* Workload resources could reference a high number of configuration resources.
* Storing all these mappings within a single workload resource could lead to excessive API payload sizes.

> * Configuration resources won’t have a direct view of where their configurations are being used.

Reviewer: (nit) I think that it should be put first.

```suggestion
* Owners of configuration resources not having permissions to view the workload resource won’t have a view of the status which is one of the main goals of this effort.
```

> * Workload resources could reference a high number of configuration resources (it isn't uncommon for a Prometheus resource to select more than a hundred of service monitors + pod monitors + rules).
> * Storing all these mappings within a single workload resource could lead to excessive API payload sizes.
> * Owners of configuration resources not having permissions to view the workload resource won’t have a view of the status which is one of the main goals of this effort.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
* Owners of configuration resources not having permissions to view the workload resource won’t have a view of the status which is one of the main goals of this effort.
* Workload resources could reference a high number of configuration resources (it isn't uncommon for a Prometheus resource to select more than a hundred of service monitors + pod monitors + rules).
* Storing all these mappings within a single workload resource could lead to excessive API payload sizes.
```

## Action Plan

> ...

Reviewer: A rough implementation plan would be nice to have (it's ok to only list the main steps that you'll plan to tackle, e.g. don't list refactoring tasks).

  * It will not surface fired alerts from PrometheusRule resources, as querying Prometheus for this data can be expensive and places undue load on Prometheus, the operator and the Kubernetes platform in general.
* Configuration resources won't expose status information that explains why they are not being selected by Prometheus or why their targets are not being scraped.
  * This non-goal can be partially addressed by tools like [`poctl`](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/poctl), which provide insights into configuration resource selection and target matching.

### Audience

* Users of Prometheus-Operator
* Maintainers and Contributors of Prometheus-Operator

## How

There are different challenges that influence the API design:

* A single config resource can be selected by multiple workload resources.
* The configuration resource may not be in the same namespace as the workload resource.
* Which workload selects which configuration resources can vary over time depending on the workload resource's label selectors and on the configuration resource's labels.

> ### CRDs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### API

The following sections describe how the status subresource will be represented for the different configuration resources.
```

metadata:
  name: minimal-alertmanager-config
  namespace: monitoring
  generation: 1
spec:
  route:
    receiver: "webhook-receiver"
  receivers:
    - name: "webhook-receiver"
      webhookConfigs:
        - url: "http://my-webhook-service.monitoring.svc:8080/"
          sendResolved: true
  status:
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: alertmanagers
        name: alertmanager-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Accepted
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ""
            message: ""
```

### Working

#### How to Enable/Disable the Status Subresource for Configuration Resources

This feature is controlled by a feature flag: `StatusForConfigurationResources`. Cluster administrators can toggle this flag to enable or disable the status subresource support for configuration resources as needed.

This feature gate is disabled by default. To enable it, pass the following argument to the prometheus-operator container during installation:

```bash
 --feature-gates=StatusForConfigurationResources=true
```

> #### Details of the Status API fields

Reviewer: can you move this to the API/CRDs section?

* `bindings`: Lists the workload resources that select the configuration resource.
  * `conditions`: Describes the latest conditions of the configuration resource in relation to the workload resource.
    * `type`: The only condition type used is `Accepted`, indicating whether the workload controller has successfully accepted the configuration resource and updated the configuration of the workload accordingly.
    * `status`: It can be either `True` or `False`.
      * `True` indicates that the configuration resource was successfully accepted by the controller and written to the configuration secret.
      * `False` means the controller rejected the configuration due to an error.
    * `reason`: Specifies the reason why the configuration was not accepted.
    * `message`: Provides the detailed error message returned by the controller during reconciliation.
    * `observedGeneration`: Represents the generation of the configuration resource that the controller has most recently observed. When the value doesn't match the object metadata's `generation` value, the condition is stale.

> #### How to remove a binding when the workload is deleted ?

Reviewer: This and the next section could be merged into a new  "Keeping the status up-to-date" section?

* Storing all these mappings within a single workload resource could lead to excessive API payload sizes.

## Action Plan

* Introduce a new feature gate.
* Manage finalizers on workload resources.
  * Add or remove a finalizer based on the feature gate status.
* Create bindings in associated configuration resources.
  * During workload reconciliation, populate status.bindings in matching configuration resources.
* Handle updates affecting selection logic
  * On changes to:
    * Namespace labels
    * Configuration resource labels
    * Workload’s label/namespace selectors
  * Recalculate and remove invalid bindings from affected configuration resources.
* Clean up bindings on workload deletion
  * When a workload is deleted, remove its references from all associated configuration resources

## Follow-ups

Once the goals of this proposal are achieved, we can extend the implementation to populate scrape targets information in the status subresource of ServiceMonitor, PodMonitor, ScrapeConfig, and Probe resources.

> ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

            message: "Referenced Secret 'my-secret' in namespace 'monitoring' is missing or does not contain the required key 'basic-auth-password'"
```

#### `PrometheusRule`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: example-prometheus-rules
  namespace: monitoring
  generation: 1
  labels:
    prometheus: k8s
    role: alert-rules
spec:
  groups:
    - name: example.rules
      interval: 30s
      rules:
        - alert: HighPodCPUUsage
          expr: sum(rate(container_cpu_usage_seconds_total{container!="", pod!=""}[5m])) by (pod) > 0.5
          for: 5m
          labels:
            severity: warning
          annotations:
            summary: "High CPU usage on pod {{ $labels.pod }}"
            description: "Pod {{ $labels.pod }} is using more than 0.5 cores for 5 minutes."
  status:
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: prometheuses
        name: prometheus-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Accepted
            status: "False"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: InvalidConfiguration

>             message: "rule 0, alert: 'HighPodCPUUsage', parse error: expected type vector in aggregation expression, got scalar"

Reviewer: (nit) the expression in the spec looks valid to me

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: minimal-alertmanager-config
  namespace: monitoring
  generation: 1
spec:
  route:
    receiver: "webhook-receiver"
  receivers:
    - name: "webhook-receiver"
      webhookConfigs:
        - url: "http://my-webhook-service.monitoring.svc:8080/"
          sendResolved: true
  status:
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: alertmanagers
        name: alertmanager-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Accepted
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
            reason: ""
            message: ""
```

#### Details of the Status API fields

* `bindings`: Lists the workload resources that select the configuration resource.
  * `conditions`: Describes the latest conditions of the configuration resource in relation to the workload resource.
    * `type`: The only condition type used is `Accepted`, indicating whether the workload controller has successfully accepted the configuration resource and updated the configuration of the workload accordingly.

>     * `status`: It can be either `True` or `False`.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
    * `status`: It can be either `True` , `False` or `Unknown`.
```

      * `True` indicates that the configuration resource was successfully accepted by the controller and written to the configuration secret.
      * `False` means the controller rejected the configuration due to an error.
    * `reason`: Specifies the reason why the configuration was not accepted.
    * `message`: Provides the detailed error message returned by the controller during reconciliation.
    * `observedGeneration`: Represents the generation of the configuration resource that the controller has most recently observed. When the value doesn't match the object metadata's `generation` value, the condition is stale.

### Implementation

> #### How to Enable/Disable the Status Subresource for Configuration Resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Feature gate
```

This feature is controlled by a feature gate: `StatusForConfigurationResources`. Cluster administrators can toggle this flag to enable or disable the status subresource support for configuration resources as needed.

This feature gate is disabled by default. To enable it, pass the following argument to the prometheus-operator container during installation:

```bash
 --feature-gates=StatusForConfigurationResources=true
```

Once we've reached feature completeness and we're confident about the stability, we will toggle the feature gate to be enabled by default.

#### Keeping the status up-to-date

> ##### How to remove a binding when the workload is deleted ?

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
##### Removing a binding when the workload is deleted
```

When a workload resource is created, we add a finalizer to it to ensure proper cleanup before deletion. If a user later requests deletion of the resource, Kubernetes does not immediately remove it; instead, it sets a deletionTimestamp on the resource. This triggers an update event, which the controller receives and processes. The controller checks if the deletionTimestamp is set to determine if the resource is in the process of being deleted. If so, the controller proceeds to clean up associated references from relevant configuration resources (e.g., ServiceMonitors, PrometheusRules). Once the cleanup is complete, the controller removes the finalizer from the workload resource, allowing Kubernetes to complete the deletion process.

##### Removing invalid bindings from configuration resources status

A configuration resource may contain a reference to a workload resource in its bindings which is not relevant anymore. This can occur under certain conditions. For example, at some point in time, a workload resource A selects a configuration resource X in namespace Y:

> * The operator updates the status of resource X to reference workload A.
> * Later, changes may happen that break this association:
> * The labels of X and/or its namespace Y are modified.
> * The label selectors and/or namespace selectors of workload A are updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The operator updates the status of resource X to reference workload A.
* At a later time, changes may happen that break this association:
  * The labels of X and/or its namespace Y are modified.
  * The label selectors and/or namespace selectors of workload A are updated.
```

> These changes can result in workload A no longer selecting configuration resource X and the configuration resource's status needs to be updated to reflect this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These changes can result in the workload A no longer selecting the configuration resource X which requires the operator to update the configuration resource's status.
```

> A separate Go routine can be used to remove invalid bindings, offloading this responsibility from the main workload controller threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A separate Go routine can be used to remove invalid bindings, offloading this responsibility from the main workload controller's reconciliation loop.
```

This background routine can periodically:
* Query all workload resources.
* List all configuration resources.
* For each configuration resource, check if its bindings are still valid.

> * Remove any bindings that no longer have an active association with a workload resource.
>   This approach ensures that the cleanup process does not interfere with the primary reconciliation loop and improves controller efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove any bindings that no longer have an active association with a workload resource.

This approach ensures that the cleanup process does not interfere with the primary reconciliation loop and improves controller efficiency.
```

### Audience

* Users of Prometheus-Operator
* Maintainers and Contributors of Prometheus-Operator

## How

There are different challenges that influence the API design:

* A single config resource can be selected by multiple workload resources.
* The configuration resource may not be in the same namespace as the workload resource.
* Which workload selects which configuration resources can vary over time depending on the workload resource's label selectors and on the configuration resource's labels.

### CRDs

#### `ServiceMonitor`/`PodMonitor`/`Probes`/`ScrapeConfig`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: example-servicemonitor
  namespace: monitoring
  generation: 3
  labels:
    team: backend
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-service
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
      - default
  endpoints:
    - port: http
      path: /metrics
      interval: 30s
      scheme: http
      basicAuth:
        username:
          name: my-secret
          key: basic-auth-username
        password:
          name: my-secret
          key: basic-auth-password
  status:
    bindings:

>       - group: monitoring.coreos.com

Reviewer: (nit) for clarity we could nest ref fields in a dedicated field.
```suggestion
      - workloadRef:
          group: group: monitoring.coreos.com
          resource: ...
          name: ...
          namespace: ...
```

Reviewer: I wouldn't be worried about the additional nesting.
But after more investigation, it isn't compatible with `+listType=map` and `+listMapKey` (the latter supports only scalar fields).

        resource: prometheuses

>         name: prometheus-main

Author: ok

        namespace: monitoring
        targets: 
          up: 2
          down: 1
          lastCheckedTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 3
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: prometheuses

>         name: prometheus-example

Author: ok

        namespace: default

>         targets: 
>           up: 3
>           down: 1
>           lastCheckedTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: the conditions say `Accepted=False` so the config isn't applied to the workload.

        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "False"
            observedGeneration: 2
            lastTransitionTime: "2024-02-08T23:52:22Z"
            reason: InvalidConfiguration
            message: "'KeepEqual' relabel action is only supported with Prometheus >= 2.41.0"

>     bindings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: ok

      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: prometheusagents
        name: prometheus-agent-main
        namespace: monitor

>         targets: 
>           up: 3
>           down: 1
>           lastCheckedTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

#### `AlertManagerConfig`

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: AlertmanagerConfig
metadata:
  name: minimal-alertmanager-config
  namespace: monitoring
  generation: 1
spec:
  route:
    receiver: "webhook-receiver"
  receivers:
    - name: "webhook-receiver"
      webhookConfigs:
        - url: "http://my-webhook-service.monitoring.svc:8080/"
          sendResolved: true
  status:
    bindings:
      - group: monitoring.coreos.com
        resource: alertmanagers
        name: alertmanager-main
        namespace: monitoring
        conditions:
          - type: Reconciled
            status: "True"
            observedGeneration: 1
            lastTransitionTime: "2025-05-20T12:34:56Z"
```

### Working

#### How to Enable/Disable the Status Subresource for Configuration Resources

This feature is controlled by a feature flag: `StatusForConfigurationResources=true|false`. Cluster administrators can toggle this flag to enable or disable the status subresource support for configuration resources as needed.

#### Details of the Status API fields

* `bindings`: Lists the workload resources that reference or use the configuration resource.

>   * `conditions`: Describes the latest status of the configuration resource.

Author: ok

>     * `type`: The only condition type used is `Reconciled`, which indicates that the workload resource controller has successfully discovered the associated configuration resource and completed the necessary reconciliation steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `type`: The only condition type used is `Reconciled`, which indicates if the workload resource controller has successfully reconciled the configuration resource with the workload resource.
```

Author: using Type accepted

    * `status`: It can be either `true` or `false`.

>       * `true` indicates that the configuration resource was successfully accepted by the controller and written to the configuration secret.

Author: ok

      * `false` means the controller rejected the configuration due to an error.

>     * `reason`: Specifies the reason for rejection, if the configuration was not accepted.

Author: ok

    * `message`: Provides the detailed error message returned by the controller during reconciliation.

>     * `observedGeneration`: Represents the generation of the configuration resource that the controller has most recently reconciled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `observedGeneration`: Represents the generation of the configuration resource that the controller has most recently observed. When the value doesn't match the object metadata's `generation` value, the condition is stale.
```

Author: ok
